---
title: "[1]: Data Creation and Context"
date: "2019-06-26"
template: "post"
draft: false
slug: "/posts/on-the-need-for-context-in-data/"
category: "Data"
tags:
  - "Data"
description: "On the nature of data and what makes it useful"
---

A colleague of mine was giving a talk recently to our department about the
importance of data and one line stuck out to me as being interesting.  His
statement basically boiled down to the idea that data does not inherently exist
in nature, but must be created at some time, otherwise it is lost forever.  I
found this observation rather interesting, and wanted to travel a bit further
down the rabbit hole into the concept of data and its usefulness.

Following from data needing to be created, we can see something rather
interesting: data is inherently human-made.  In order to create data, some
observation needs to be made about an idea or entity, and a number or label
assigned to it.  These observations may be a pressure reading from a meter, the
temperature outside, or the color of the spots on a bee.  Let's examine both
qualifiable data points, such as the bee's spots, and quantifiable data points,
such as the pressure and temperature.

The qualifiable data points can be more easily shown to be human-made since the
label of the data point itself is defined somehow by humans.  In our example of
the color of spots on a bee, the color of the spots exists in the natural world,
but the color yellow is created by a human and has become generally accepted to
mean the wavelengths of light reaching our eyes from the bee.  Thus we can see
that qualifiable data is human-made.

Quantifiable data points use a similar argument, but we have to look at them
more closely. At least two parts are required to create a quantifiable data
point: a number and a unit of measure. While it is still a debate of whether
numbers themselves are natural or created by humans, we can definitively say
that a unit of measure is human-made.  To say that it is 37 degrees Celsius
outside and understand what that means, we first need to define what a degree
Celsius is.  If we leave off the unit of measure, we are merely left with a
number by itself.

Back out of the philosophical world, where does just a number get us, though? In
the real world of utilizing this data, not very far. If given the number 37 and
asked if I need to wear long pants or shorts when I go outside, I would have no
clue how to answer.  While a ridiculous idea on Earth, suppose it was 37 Kelvin
outside.  The decision of pants or shorts wouldn't really matter much at all in
such a situation.  Thus, we can't remove the unit of measure from the data point
and still have a useful data point.

Continuing further in the real world, let's look at the usefulness of the data
we create.  By itself, data doesn't really serve much purpose.  We must combine
it with other context for it to really give us any understanding of what we are
observing.  Telling someone who has lived their whole life in a
climate-controlled room at 22 degree Celsius that is 37 degrees Celsius outside
will not give them any clarity to how warm it actually is outside.  They would
need more context to truly understand what that means; be it direct, such as
their room being heated to that temperature, or indirect, where they perhaps
know what a five-degree Celsius change feels like and can extrapolate the
15-degree difference. 

Especially in the modern world, data has become more and more widespread and
precious.  While we should respect and study how data has shaped our lives and
aided our decision-making processes, we should still view data as a human-made
construct which must be captured when possible, else it is gone forever.
